Rewrite Compute Pressure Doc. (#5887)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/docs/web-platform/compute-pressure/index.md

  - kenchris
  - arskama
tags:
  - api
  - performance
  - monitoring
  - capabilities
---

  The Compute Pressure API offers high-level states that represent the pressure on the system.
  It allows the implementation to use the right underlying hardware metrics to ensure that users
  can take advantage of all the processing power available to them as long as the system is not
  under unmanageable stress.

## Current status

<div class="table-wrapper scrollbar">

| Step                                     | Status                              |
| ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------  |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]               |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | [Complete][specs]                   |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback)            |
| 4. Origin trial                          | Not Started                         |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started                         |

</div>

### Try out the Compute Pressure API

To experiment with the Compute Pressure API locally, read this [page][how-to].

## Interfaces

> Pressure Observer API can be run in the following contexts:

Reviewer: I think it should be Compute Pressure API, not Pressure Observer API

Author: agree

- Window or main thread
- Dedicated Worker
- Shared Worker

The Compute Pressure API defines two new interfaces.

> `PressureObserver`: An object to observe the compute pressure of any number of sources at a

Reviewer: `source` is used a lot and should be defined early in the doc. Can we explain first iteration in Chromium only exposes CPU source but others may come later such as...

predefined sample rate. Each observer can asynchronously observe pressure changes trends in a
system.

`PressureRecord`: Describes the pressure trend at a specific moment of transition. Objects of this
type can only be obtained in two ways: as an input to your PressureObserver callback, or by calling

> PressureObserver.takeRecords().

Reviewer: `PressureObserver.takeRecords()` doesn't exist. I would use "calling the `takeRecords()` method on PressureObserver instance."

Author: Agree, will be fixed.

### PressureObserver

When an `PressureObserver` object is created, it's configured to watch the pressure of supported
sources, at a given sample rate. The supported sources can be individually observed/unobserved at
any time during the lifetime of the PressureObserver object. The sample rate cannot be changed
after the creation of the object.

#### Constructor

`PressureObserver(callback, options)`: Creates a new `PressureObserver` object which will invoke a
specified callback function when it detects that a change in the values of the source being
observed has happened.

> The constructor takes a [callback](#callback) function and [options](#options)(optional), as parameters.

Reviewer: The constructor takes a mandatory [callback](#callback) function and optional [options](#options), as parameters.

##### Callback {: #callback }

> 'callback()': Callback receives the observer handle as well as an array of unread `PressureRecord` objects.

Reviewer: I think you meant backticks "\`callback\`"

> 'callback()': Callback receives the observer handle as well as an array of unread `PressureRecord` objects.

Reviewer: JS examples does not show observer handle later. Shall we simply say the callback is called with an array of unread `PressureRecord` objects?

Author: will do

##### Options {: #options }

> `PressureObserverOptions`: Contains the sample rate,`sampleRate`, at which the user requests updates.

Reviewer: Please share the unit (ms, s, etc..)

Author: good point!

#### Methods

`PressureObserver.observe(source)`: Tells the 'PressureObserver' which source to observe.

`PressureObserver.unobserve(source)`: Tells the 'PressureObserver' to stop observing a source.

`PressureObserver.disconnect()`: Tells the 'PressureObserver' to stop observing all sources.

`PressureObserver.takeRecords()`: Returns a sequence of [records](#records), since the last callback invocation.

> `PressureObserver.supportedSources()`(read only): Returns supported source types by the hardware.

Reviewer: We should mention this one is static while the other ones are not. `PressureObserver.supportedSources()` is valid JS, while `PressureObserver.takeRecords()` is not.

##### Parameters

> `source`: The source to be observed, for example `cpu`.  This must be one of the [supported source

Reviewer: Mention here `cpu` is the only one supported for now.

Author: will do

types](https://w3c.github.io/compute-pressure/#dfn-supported-source-types).

### PressureRecord

> The `PressureRecord` interface of the Pressure Observer API describes the pressure trend of a

Reviewer: Compute Pressure, not Pressure Observer

Author: true

source at a specific moment of transition.

#### Instance Properties

`PressureRecord.source` (Read-only): Returns the origin source from which the record is coming.

> `PressureRecord.state` (Read-only): Returns the pressure state recorded.

Reviewer: Which value shall we expect? Strings?

Author: will complete.

types](https://w3c.github.io/compute-pressure/#dfn-supported-source-types).

You should check for the presence of `ComputePressureObserver` in the `window`
scope to see if the feature is available:
### PressureRecord

```javascript
if ('ComputePressureObserver' in window) {
  // The Compute Pressure API is available.
The `PressureRecord` interface of the Pressure Observer API describes the pressure trend of a
source at a specific moment of transition.

#### Instance Properties

`PressureRecord.source` (Read-only): Returns the origin source from which the record is coming.

`PressureRecord.state` (Read-only): Returns the pressure state recorded.

`PressureRecord.time`(Read-only): Returns a high resolution timestamp.

##Feedback {: #feedback }

The Compute Pressure team wants to hear about your experiences using the Compute Pressure API.
 Please provide your feedback and file issues on [GitHub][issues].

## Examples

### Is the Compute Pressure API supported?

```js
if ('PressureObserver' in globalThis) {
  // The Compute Pressure API is supported.
}
```
### Creating a pressure observer

> ## Use cases

Reviewer: I think it would still be valuable to have use cases listed in this doc like we did [there](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/web-platform/document-picture-in-picture/#use-cases)

Author: I added the ones we had in the explainer.

> let observer = new PressureObserver(callback, { sampleRate: 0.5 });

Reviewer: Nit: Use `const`

> let observer = new PressureObserver(callback, { sampleRate: 0.5 });

Reviewer: Instead of `callback`, maybe `(records) => { /* ... */ }` to make it clear.

Author: ok

> implementation.

Reviewer: It is not clear what it means. Can you explain?

Author: I ll try.

> `ComputePressure.observe(source)'.

Reviewer: Fix last backtick

Author: yes

> observer.observe('cpu');

Reviewer: Use double quotes as Prettier says. `"cpu"`

Author: true

> In this example the `cpu` is the pressure source we are interested in. For now, it is the only

Reviewer: Use double quotes consistently for \`"cpu"\`.

Author: yes

Author: forgot that one, it will come with the next fix, sorry

> source available. In the future, there may be other sources such as `gpu`, `power`.

Reviewer: Not thermals?

Author: true, since we hope to be the next one

> observer.unobserve('cpu');

Reviewer: Double quotes

Author: yes

> `PressureRecords' objects stored in the pressure observer, emptying it out.

Reviewer: Fix last backtick

Author: ok

> Calling this method clears the pending records list, so the callback will not be run.

Reviewer: You're defining a callback function that will not be called. There may be a better way to show in the JS example.

Author: See above

> function callback(records) {

Reviewer: It would have been nice to have a proper callback function example before `takeRecords()`.

Author: We ll come up with something to cover this case and the next comment.

```
### Tell us about the API design
Is there anything about the API that does not work as you expected? Do you see any missing method
or property for your usage of the API? File a spec issue or comment on an existing one in the
corresponding [GitHub repo][issues].

### Report a problem with the implementation
Did you find a bug with Chromium's implementation? Or is the implementation different from the
spec?
File a bug at [new.crbug.com](https://new.crbug.com). Be sure to include as much detail as you can, simple instructions
for reproducing, and enter [Blink>PerformanceAPIs>ComputePressure][blink-component] in the **Components** box.

## Helpful links {: #helpful }

> - [Specifications] [specs]

Reviewer: Remove space between

Author: correct

- [Public explainer][explainer]

> - [Compute Pressure API Demo][demo] | [Compute Pressure API Demo source][demo-source]

Reviewer: Demo crashes chrome tab in Canary with experimental web platform features flag enabled. Is this expected?
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/634478/229499053-2290d670-d207-4eba-8beb-e622cea5b380.png)

Reviewer: Note that it only happens when I don't run Chrome with the command line flag `--enable-features=ComputePressure`.

Author: ha yes, maybe we could have a more graceful way to exit, if feature is not enabled.

- [Chromium tracking bug][cr-bug]
- [ChromeStatus.com entry][cr-status]
- Blink Component: [`Blink>PerformanceAPIs>ComputePressure`][blink-component]
- [TAG Review](https://github.com/w3ctag/design-reviews/issues/795)
- [Ready For Trial][dev-trial]
- [HOWTO page][how-to]

[specs]: https://w3c.github.io/compute-pressure/
[issues]: https://github.com/w3c/compute-pressure/issues
[demo]:  https://w3c.github.io/compute-pressure/demo/
[demo-source]: https://github.com/w3c/compute-pressure/tree/main/demo
[explainer]: https://github.com/w3c/compute-pressure#readme

> [cr-bug]: https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=1231886

Author: oops! sorry

    - Reduce the quality of video processing (video resolution, frames per second)
    - Skip non-essential video processing, such as some camera filters
    - Disable non-essential audio processing, such as WebRTC noise suppression
    - Turn quality-vs-speed and size-vs-speed knobs towards “speed” in video and audio encoding
      (in WebRTC, WebCodecs, or software encoding)

  - Video games
    - Use lower-quality assets to compose the game’s video (3D models, textures, shaders) and audio
      (voices, sound effects)
    - Disable effects that result in less realistic non-essential details (water / cloth / fire
      animations, skin luminance, glare effects, physical simulations that don’t impact gameplay)
    - Tweak quality-vs-speed knobs in the game’s rendering engine (shadows quality, texture filtering,
      view distance)

Technically these can be accomplished by knowing thermal states (e.g., is the system being
passively cooled - throttled) as well as CPU pressure states for the threads the site is using such
as main thread and workers. System thermal state is a global state and can be affected by other
apps and sites than the observing site.

## Interfaces

> Compute Pressure API can be run in the following contexts:

Reviewer: Nit: The Compute Pressure API...

- Window or main thread
- Dedicated Worker
- Shared Worker

The Compute Pressure API defines two new interfaces.

`PressureObserver`: An object to observe the compute pressure of any number of sources at a

> predefined sample rate. First iteration in Chromium exposes `cpu` as `source`. See section about

Reviewer: Nit: Use double quotes around `cpu`

after the creation of the object.

#### Constructor

`PressureObserver(callback, options)`: Creates a new `PressureObserver` object which will invoke a
specified callback function when it detects that a change in the values of the source being
observed has happened.

The constructor takes a mandatory [callback](#callback) function and optional [options](#options), as parameters.

##### Callback {: #callback }

`callback()`: The callback is called with an array of unread `PressureRecord` objects.

##### Options {: #options }

`PressureObserverOptions`: Contains the sample rate,`sampleRate` in Hz, at which the user requests
updates.

#### Methods

`PressureObserver.observe(source)`: Tells the 'PressureObserver' which source to observe.

`PressureObserver.unobserve(source)`: Tells the 'PressureObserver' to stop observing a source.

`PressureObserver.disconnect()`: Tells the 'PressureObserver' to stop observing all sources.

`PressureObserver.takeRecords()`: Returns a sequence of [records](#records), since the last callback invocation.

`static PressureObserver.supportedSources()` (read only): Returns supported source types by the hardware.

##### Parameters {: #parameters }

> `source`: The source to be observed, for example `cpu`. This must be one of the [supported source

Reviewer: Nit: Use double quotes around `cpu`

types](https://w3c.github.io/compute-pressure/#dfn-supported-source-types).

> In the current version of Compute Pressure, only `cpu` is supported.

Reviewer: Nit: Use double quotes around `cpu`

`PressureRecord.time` (Read-only): Returns a `number` representing a high resolution timestamp.

##Feedback {: #feedback }

The Compute Pressure team wants to hear about your experiences using the Compute Pressure API.
 Please provide your feedback and file issues on [GitHub][issues].

## Examples

### Is the Compute Pressure API supported?

```js
if ('PressureObserver' in globalThis) {
  // The Compute Pressure API is supported.
}
```
### Creating a pressure observer

Create the pressure observer by calling its constructor with a callback function to be run whenever
there is a pressure update:

```js
const observer = new PressureObserver((records) => { /* ... */ }, { sampleRate: 0.5 });
```

A sample rate, `sampleRate`, of 0.5 Hz, means that there will be updates at most every two seconds.

If the sample rate requested cannot be served by the system. The system will provide samples at 
the best suitable rate existing. For example if the rate of 2 Hz is requested, but the system can
only provide samples at maximum 1 Hz, 1 Hz will be selected.

### Using a pressure observer

There is only one way to start a pressure observer. For each source call

> `ComputePressure.observe(source)`.

Reviewer: I think this should be `observer.observe(source)`, not `ComputePressure`

```js
observer.observe("cpu");
```

In this example the `"cpu"` is the pressure source we are interested in. For now, it is the only

> source available. In the future, there may be other sources such as `gpu`, `power` or `thermals`.

Reviewer: Nit: Use double quotes around gpu, power, and thermals

To stop observing a source, use the `unobserve()` method, as in the following example:

```js
observer.unobserve("cpu");
```

In order to unobserve all sources at once, use the `disconnect()` method, as in the following example:

```js
observer.disconnect();
```
### Retrieving pressure records

Pressure records can be retrieved with a callback function, which will be invoked every time a
change is happening in the pressure state.

```js
function callback(records) {
  const lastRecord = records[records.length - 1];
  console.log(`Current pressure ${lastRecords.state}`);

>   // Do something with records.

Reviewer: Maybe suggest what to do to showcase `state` values
```js
if (lastRecord.state === "critical") {
  // Reduce workers load...
} else ...
```

}

const observer = new PressureObserver(callback, { sampleRate: 1 });
await observer.observe("cpu");
```
The user can also force the reading of `PressureRecord` by calling the `takeRecords()` method.

The `takeRecords()` method of the `PressureObserver` interface returns an array of
`PressureRecords` objects stored in the pressure observer, emptying it out.

Calling this method clears the pending records list, so the callback will not be run.

```js

> const observer = new PressureObserver(()=>{}, { sampleRate: 1 });

Reviewer: Maybe?
```js
const observer = new PressureObserver(()=>{ /* Will not be called as we call takeRecords later */}, { sampleRate: 1 });
```

---
layout: 'layouts/doc-post.njk'
title: Compute Pressure API
description: >
  Compute Pressure offers high-level states that represent the pressure on the system. It allows
  the implementation to use the right underlying hardware metrics to ensure that users can take
  advantage of all the processing power available to them as long as the system is not under
  unmanageable stress.

subhead: >
  Get informed about your system compute pressure.

> date: 2023-03-15

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2021-06-07
updated: 2023-04-06
```

<div class="table-wrapper scrollbar">

| Step                                     | Status                              |
| ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------  |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]               |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | [Complete][specs]                   |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback)            |
| 4. Origin trial                          | Not Started                         |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started                         |

</div>

### Try out the Compute Pressure API

To experiment with the Compute Pressure API locally, read this [page][how-to].

## Use-Cases

The primary use cases enhanced by the current Compute Pressure API are video conferencing and
video games.

These popular real-time applications are classified as soft. That is, the quality of service
degrades if the system is exercised beyond certain states, but does not lead to a total system
failure. These soft real-time applications greatly benefit from being able to adapt their workloads
based on CPU consumption/pressure.

> Specifically, v1 aims to facilitate the following adaptation decisions for these use cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Specifically, version one aims to facilitate the following adaptation decisions for these use cases:
```

Author: I will remove that "version one" all together.

>   - Video conferencing

Author: ok

    - Reduce the quality of video processing (video resolution, frames per second)
    - Skip non-essential video processing, such as some camera filters
    - Disable non-essential audio processing, such as WebRTC noise suppression
    - Turn quality-vs-speed and size-vs-speed knobs towards “speed” in video and audio encoding
      (in WebRTC, WebCodecs, or software encoding)

  - Video games
    - Use lower-quality assets to compose the game’s video (3D models, textures, shaders) and audio
      (voices, sound effects)
    - Disable effects that result in less realistic non-essential details (water / cloth / fire
      animations, skin luminance, glare effects, physical simulations that don’t impact gameplay)
    - Tweak quality-vs-speed knobs in the game’s rendering engine (shadows quality, texture filtering,
      view distance)

Technically these can be accomplished by knowing thermal states (e.g., is the system being
passively cooled - throttled) as well as CPU pressure states for the threads the site is using such
as main thread and workers. System thermal state is a global state and can be affected by other

> apps and sites than the observing site.

Author: thanks! I ll update

function callback(records) {
  const lastRecord = records[records.length - 1];
  console.log(`Current pressure ${lastRecords.state}`);

>   if (lastRecords.state === critical) {

Reviewer: critical is a string, use `"cricital"`. Same for `serious` below

>   if (lastRecords.state === critical) {

Reviewer: It should be `lastRecord`, not `lastRecords`.

Calling this method clears the pending records list, so the callback will not be run.

```js
const observer = new PressureObserver(

>   () => { /* Will not be called as we call takeRecords(). */ },

Author: Yes, I updated the example, if you want to take a look. Thanks again!
